Voiceover: One second. Adjust the light.
Veronica: Yes.
Voiceover: Is this the [switch]?
Veronica: I think it's
the other side over there.
Voiceover: Oh, it's on
this side. This one.
Veronica: This one, oh, oops.
Voicover: Can't be that one.
I shocked myself.
Maybe this one?
Veronica: Yeah, I think so.
Ryan: It's a program that sends Americans
all over the world for
about two years, sorry.
Voiceover: Sorry.
Very interesting.
Ryan: What do you see?
Voiceover: Oh, just-
Ryan: Is it a rat?
Voiceover: No, it's just a bug.
Ryan: Oh, no, that's fine.
I thought it was a rat
because it could happen.
And I was gonna like freak out.
George: You know what's funny
about South Africa though it's
like you said, nothing goes
according to plan here.
(rain beating)
(George sighs)
Cameraman: Let's move.
(rain beating)
(thunder booms)
George: Nothing goes
according to plan, ever.
(Cameraman laughs)
(thunder booms)
Cameraman: Oh.
Fran: You're not gonna be
able to do our interview
since the power's out.
Cameraman: How are you gonna
cook if the power's out?
Fran: Oh, shit!
(rain beating)
Fran: Ugh, I'll just prepare it,
and then hopefully it will stay on.
But then if it doesn't
it'll come on eventually.
(Veronica laughs)
Veronica: Peace Corps is,
I would say at the basic level Peace Corps
sends Americans to other
countries to help with
projects or teaching or just help
communities to improve
their way of living.
(guitar music)
(horn honks)
Uh, I joined Peace Corps because I wanted
to help people in some way.
And I also wanted to get
experience interntaionally.
I was hoping to go to Uganda,
my first choice in terms
of region was Africa,
but specifically I wanted to go to Uganda.
I was still excited.
I didn't know that much
about South Africa,
but I was still pretty excited.
I was kind of surprised with
how developed everything was.
But yeah, it was kind
of weird to just like
get off, get on a plane in America
and fly for however many hours,
and then land in Africa and seem like
you're in America still. (laughs)
(horn honks)
(brakes squeaking)
(guitar music)
(bell jingling)
(chickens clucking)
(baby crying)
Ryan: Even when I first
found out I was coming
to South Africa, reaction
by some people are like,
oh, we didn't know that they,
why would they have Peace
Corps in South Africa?
Not only are we dealing with
similar development issues
that other volunteers might face,
but we're also dealing with
knowing that there is money,
there are resources in this country,
and they're not equally
distributed by any means.
And we can see it on a, we see it,
I mean, when we go to Pretoria,
when we go to the cities,
we actually feel it.
And there are days when, in Pretoria,
I can start off, if I'm at
a mall or I'm, you know,
in a private taxi or
I'm having a great meal,
and that same day I can be
back here in my community.
To have that in one day, at
first it was really difficult
just wrapping your mind around it,
and how can people be okay with that?
(people talking)
Maybe if the HIV rate wasn't
the highest in the world,
maybe if the youth
unemployment wasn't so high,
maybe if rape wasn't such a big issue,
maybe we wouldn't be here, you know?
And it kind of feels
wrong having to justify
us being here by giving
all of those statistics,
but, you know, there are problems here.
(guitar music)
Kevin: What you see here is
all the development, and that's it.
It's now, as far as you look to the left,
as far as you look to the right,
protected, there's no, I love
it, there's no development.
Kevin: You know, Peace Corps markets,
like any marketing firm
they're going to give
an ideal version of what
Peace Corps is like.
So that's why you see the
pictures of digging a well
out in the middle of nowhere,
and happy people all around you,
rejoicing at what you're doing.
But, it's so difficult
to put a common stamp
on Peace Corps because
it's true, the saying,
every experience is different.
And I've observed here in
South Africa, just one country,
that there is a huge
difference in your experience
from one town to another town,
and it's things that you can't anticipate.
I'm living now in paradise.
(guitar music)
The world has changed since 1961,
the communication is different,
the access to the internet,
which makes the world,
we can all communicate well.
Most of the volunteers
now have Blackberries.
Voiceover: Has anybody ever told you that
it's like Posh Corps
or anything like that?
Kevin: Only once, and they'll
never make that mistake again.
I was in Pretoria at Peace
Corps, and it was somebody from,
they weren't from South
Africa, of course, cause nobody
in South Africa will
say this is Posh Corps.
George: What's Posh Corps?
Posh Corps is what Peace Corps volunteers,
maybe from other countries or
even Peace Corps volunteers
within South Africa or within a country,
that's what they call the volunteers who
have more access to first world amenities.
I have two really big sinks
right outside my door,
and I actually have running
hot water from one of them,
which is kind of unheard
of in Peace Corps.
I do have a flushing toilet.
Yeah, I actually, I have my own bathroom.
It has a flush toilet, it has a bathtub,
and it even has like a sink.
I'm actually sweeping the
ants out of my bathroom
before I take a bath.
And they just swarm everywhere.
I was actually saying how I
think they're really resilient,
and that kind of embodies
Peace Corps. (laughs)
No matter how many times
I keep trying to keep them
out of my house and they
keep finding new ways in.
I would definitely say that
this is not your parents
Peace Corps anymore,
it's totally different.
You have internet, you have
computers, you have electricity.
The problems the world is facing now isn't
necessarily the same ones
they were facing in the 50's,
and, you know, I mean in
the 60's and 70's, you know?
Now it's, like we said it's
about resource allocation.
But there's still be a need for diplomacy,
and sharing American culture.
Just cause you have
cell phones doesn't mean
that you don't need those things.
Fran: They think that just because we have
like Pretoria and Cape
Town at our disposal,
and that some of our sites
have like running water
or whatever we have, nice, like
we live with host families,
we have nice things,
that it's easy, you know?
And that we don't struggle,
but that's not true.
Okay, Denella?
Kids: L O E.
Fran:[Donai]
Kids: [Ene].
Fran: Hello.
Kids: Hi.
Fran: How are you?
Kids: Fine.
So calling it Posh Corps,
I think, is really,
can be very ignorant.
This country, am I even
allowed to say vulgar words?
This county's a mind fuck, right?
It's like a total mind fuck. (laughs)
It like just messes with your head, so,
I just think it's a silly
thing for people to say.
And I get really annoyed
when people say it,
cause they don't know.
Sean: For me, like I
studied Swahili in college,
and I knew that I wanted
to work in Africa, and,
I always thought that was
gonna be Kenya and Tanzania,
and I was kind of bummed when I found out
it was South Africa.
South Africa never was appealing to me.
(animal squealing)
(woman in scarf speaking native language.)
Sean: Yeah.
Woman in scarf: [Turn in.]
Sean: It's good?
(woman in scarf speaking native language)
Sean: Yeah.
Woman in scarf: Huh? Alrighty.
Sean: Yeah, alright, yeah.
(laughs) Yeah, it's good.
But, after being in the
country and talking to people
about other countries in Africa, like,
this seems like a great
place to start and kind of
keep some meat on my
bones and make decisions
and plot and do things that way.
(guitar music)
(kids talking and laughing)
I knew I was gonna love
whatever was gonna come
across me eyes and, so whatever came in
to South Africa I just decided to love.
(singing and clapping)
Veronica: My village is
called Mavalani village.
It's, I'm still not sure how many people,
but they estimate like 5,000.
It's pretty, it's kind
of spread out I think.
And there's no like
structures like a clinic,
or a community center or a
library or anything like that.
We have a few organizations and then
a lot of churches and that's about it.
Okay, okay, so I'll just start
here and then wrap around.
But this is where I've stayed
during my Peace Corps service.
Over here is the garage
where we usually store
drinking water and things.
This is where I do laundry
and then hang them. (laughs)
Yeah, yeah, I definitely feel like a
different person in the village.
It's definitely a more
relaxed feeling that I have,
just because it feels
like home at this point.
And then this is my room right here.
Living in this house, I like it.
I like having the big
windows and just like
having a lot of air coming through,
and it's just like a lot of space.
This, I don't know how big it is,
but it's probably not that
much space to other people,
but, (laughs) but like,
compared to other volunteers
it's like a big room.
(singing and clapping)
So my role in the village is,
I'm assigned to an organization called
[Here Swingve Bacdahalo Organization],
and they run six projects
throughout the village.
I primarily work with the home based care
Drop in Center and then
occasionally do stuff
with the Victim Empowerment Project.
For me, like the thing that I
do as a volunteer is just like
try to start projects that
will benefit the community
and that they can get
involved in and interested in.
(kids talking)
So this is a mural that I
did, me and the kids did,
after an anti-bullying sessions
that we did for a week.
Yeah, so for the anti-bullying campaign
we did a few sessions
at the Drop In Center,
which was just like teaching
kids what bullying is,
and then after that the
kids came up with rules,
things like no hitting
and no throwing rocks,
no swearing, no calling people bad names.
And like, their signature of the contract
that they would agree to
the rules of the contract
we're putting their handprints on the wall
in the form of a peace
sign, so... (laughs)
Phillip: Yeah, when she
came with this idea,
I took it as a lie
(Veronica laughs)
but after what you've done here,
we have seen a huge change on children,
on children's behavior, they're
not bullying each other,
they're not fighting,
they're working as a team.
They're living like brothers and sisters.
What I can say is that
she left a mark on us,
and we're still expecting more from her,
and her leaving, it would be a wound
into our hears but we don't have choice
It's left a mark that America
is a very helpful country.
A country that doesn't want other people,
that doesn't want seeing
other people suffering.
They are friendly and so loving.
(kids talking and laughing)
Veronica: I can tell you
like during the first,
like I said the first year,
the first six months or so I would say,
it was, like I said,
difficult of getting them
to realize that I was an
American because I was black.
But also it was difficult to prove to them
that I could do the work as
well as a white person could.
Because they would say
things like Oh Veronica,
don't think like a black person,
think like a white person.
As if someone else would say,
Oh, the early bird gets the worm.
It was just like a saying
they they had. (laughs)
But like I tried to
explain to them, I think,
I hope I got it across to them just like,
why as black people themselves,
and just like talking
to another black person
they shouldn't say something like that
and shouldn't think like that.
But every now and then something like that
will come out of someone's mouth at work.
We'll be like Oh, we need
a white person to come
and do this so they can do it
right, or something like that,
and I'm just like please
don't, please don't say that.
Voiceover: And what is the
thing you will miss most
when Veronica leaves?
(Philip translates)
(speaking native language)
Philip: They are saying that
they will miss her love,
her support, because they know
that in terms of conflict,
when they fail to handle conflict,
they will call Veronica and help them.
There were taking her like their sister.
They were family, in fact.
So, it will be hard for
them when she's gone
because they were used to her.
Voiceover: Do you hope that
she can come back one day?
(Philip translates)
Women: Yes! (laughing)
(speaking native language)
(Philip laughs)
Philip: Yeah, they say
they wish if she can come.
If and when she is going
back, they are not interested.
If it was their way, they
would say she must stay.
(laughing)
(guitar music)
Kevin: I think it's incredibly
difficult for someone
my age to join Peace Corps.
I was in a job I didn't really like,
I was making money but I didn't feel like
I was doing anything meaningful.
So I could just stay at
my job and make money
and spend it on things I
don't really care about,
or do this.
So, I joke it's my midlife
crisis, but it's not really.
It was just something I've wanted to do,
and the timing was such
that I asked the question
if not now, when?
When I first came, the
first week I was here,
Peace Corps held a perma
gardening workshop.
And it was for, it was held here,
but it was for the Peace
Corps volunteers in the area.
I had, the only training
I've had in gardening
was the perma gardening workshop,
My background is tech, but, the point
I think that should be made
is that where I'm hoping
Peace Corps remains flexible
in letting volunteers
have some autonomy because
even though I'm a tech guy,
with a tech background, I
can spend, and I don't mind,
that's what I'm here for,
I'll help out in any way,
but there's interest, so
for me, that's opportunity,
and they've taken it.
And if you look out there,
we've got stuff growing
all over the place.
So again, my background is tech,
but there was an opportunity
here with the gardening,
there was interest, people
took off, so I went there.
That's where I went and, I
don't know how you fit that,
how you explain that to a volunteer
when they first come to a site,
and they're looking for what to do.
My suggestion is you kind of have to just
be an opportunist and see
where you can help out.
So that's the biggest challenge is that,
what you think you're going to do,
you're not going to do it,
likely you're not going to do it,
and then you're going
to get to a site and,
there's gonna be other things,
other factors in there,
that are just gonna prevent you from doing
what you think you were going to do.
So that's very frustrating.
I don't know how Peace
Corps, in their defense,
I don't know how they
can prep you for that.
I don't know.
(guitar music)
I think South Africa was
particularly difficult
as a location for a number of reasons.
Yes, there are a lot of nice things,
but you don't have any money,
so you can't do these things.
So the person you're working
with is driving a BMW,
and you are not, so
there's this disconnect.
You know, you're given 80 rand a day,
that's your allowance, you know,
to put it in perspective that's about
10 dollars a day to live on.
So, yeah, you see all this stuff,
but you don't get to experience it.
I actually, one time I did
my laundry, I was in Hinesa,
I did my laundry, put it
on the clothesline to dry,
the woman that comes to the house,
didn't like how I did my laundry,
took it all down, washed
it, put it back up,
charged me 30 rand. (laughs)
I'm just getting into the groove now.
Here's what was going to happen:
I'm working with 6th and 7th graders,
and the lab I work with,
we have 20 computers,
and the goal is to get them
some basic typing skills,
and by the end of
September they'll be able
to research and write a paper.
(kids talking)
Today what I want you to do is I want you
to practice typing, those
of you with a typing name,
I want you to practice a little bit,
and then yes, you can
go back to [unka], okay?
Yes, I do talk differently
and what you do,
you know exactly, yeah, you hit it.
You become, first of all, you
start limiting your words,
so you use less words.
Have any of you done the typing game yet?
Do you know what the typing game is?
Do you understand any words
coming out of my mouth?
Yes, now I know your village voice,
and yes, we all do it.
You're a Peace Corps volunteer, you and I,
were having a conversation,
someone will come in,
who's English is a second language,
and you talk differently,
yes, the village voice, so.
(guitar music)
(kids talking)
George: I know I gave it to you, Julia.
I will make some more. Antino?
When you're a teacher in South Africa,
there's no room for compromise.
I mean, I think I was, I had
some level of preparedness,
but I don't think you can
ever truthfully be prepared
to teach here coming
from the United States.
(kids talking)
Hey! (clapping) Hey! (clapping)
Class: [Hey!] (clapping)
George: Good morning!
Class: Good morning!
George: Like they told you
your class may be overcrowded,
I just didn't expect there
to be not enough furniture.
Like in the first few
days of class half my kids
were standing cause there
weren't enough desks.
(kids reciting)
I don't have textbooks for my learners.
I just have to write stuff on the board
and they have to copy it.
It's a waste of time, but...
Yeah, it's just stuff like
that you don't think about,
you take for granted
in American classrooms,
but they don't have as
much materials here.
Okay, do this, okay.
The second part, activity
four, activity five.
I'm going to explain
them now, again, okay.
Do you know how to do a line graph?
Class: Yes.
George: Okay, let's revise it then.
So here we have months
and we have numbers, yes?
Class: Yes.
George: Okay, the numbers
are going to represent
how many cows a man has.
(door banging)
Oh, okay.
I mean, like, in my school,
we have third world materials,
we're working with third
world materials, we've got
chalkboard and chalk, that's
pretty much all we got.
But, the curriculum, or
what they might want us
to teach these kids, or the
workbooks they might give us,
if we get workbooks, it's,
the demands are first world,
and I feel like the conditions
on the ground are still third world.
How many from 70 until...
You live in a third world place,
then you know, you get
a call from the office,
and you have to go into Pretoria,
it's only two hours away.
You go two hours from where I am,
and you're living in like
a bustling metropolis
that has first world everything.
And then as a Peace Corps volunteer,
then you go back to your village.
And that's, I've heard
that that's one of the most
difficult parts of being in
South Africa as a volunteer
is having the mental
toughness to be able to
withstand the constant switch from
living in a third world
going to the first world,
then going back to the third world again.
(guitar music)
My village, the predominant culture
in my village is Ndbele, but it's,
kwaNdebele is this whole
area's kind of weird,
because there was this
whole homeland [zact] thing
where they kind of moved all the
different tribes different places.
And they moved the Ndebele's to this area.
Fendzi: Oh, quite nice.
George: Yeah.
Fendzi: Yes, very nice.
George: So if I was going to get married,
I would wear this also.
Fendzi: Also, put it inside.
This thing, it's a sign from the Ndebeles.
I don't know what I can explain
but it's our traditional Ndebeles
when the boys are coming
from the mountain.
George: Oh, so this is
Ndebeles, it's not Sotho,
Fendzi: Yeah, no.
George: this is Ndebeles.
Fendzi: Ndebeles, yeah.
George: So my family
is Ndebeles and Sotho.
Fendzi: Yeah, yeah.
George: I feel like Ndebeles are,
there a little more traditional I think.
I always thought Ndebeles are,
they're really, really
proud of their culture.
But I can't say if that's
specifically a Ndebele thing,
because I've only lived
in the Ndebele village.
Oh, oh yeah, definitely Ndebele colors,
Fendzi: They are.
Fendzi: No problem, yeah.
George: These are very Ndebele colors.
I think, I think,
(speaking in Ndebele)
I see beautiful, yes?
Fendzi: (speaking in Ndebele)
Yes, you look good in these.
You must take a picture,
so they will see it in America.
(George laughs)
Fendzi: (speaking in Ndebele)
I think you are adjusting
well to South Africa,
and with your studies.
We are happy that George is in our family,
but you need to study more because
we do not speak English in KwaNdebele.
George: Okay.
Fendzi: Thank you, George. (laughs)
George: Ah, siyabonga.
(laughing)
Peace Corps has made me a better person.
I can already tell.
I'm just more patient, and it's made me,
I feel like, what Peace Corps does,
and this is why I think a lot
of people fail in Peace Corps,
is because they come to Peace Corps,
like I said, running away from something.
Thing about Peace Corps,
is that is exposes all your weaknesses.
You know what's funny?
When my girlfriend and
my friends come to visit
in September, right, they
said they were going to visit,
my girlfriend speaks Chinese
and I don't speak Chinese.
(Sibusiso laughs)
Sibusiso: They know how to speak Chinese?
George: They know how to speak Chinese.
Sibusiso: You don't know?
George: I'm not Chinese man,
so I don't know how to speak Chinese.
I don't speak Chinese, but my friends,
they speak Chinese.
So you're going to enjoy it, man.
Sibusiso: Yeah, yeah, ching, chong.
George: No, my gosh, it's
not even a word, man.
Sibusiso: I want them to
speak it at the plaza, man,
people are gonna be like, ahh,
this guy, I knew you were Chinese.
(both laughing)
George: That's true, if
I'm hangin out with my
Chinese friends, they'll
be, ahh, you, when, I know.
(both laughing)
You're Chinese, you've been lying.
Yeah, Sibu, Sibusiso,
Sibusiso is probably
one of my best friends
here in South Africa.
He's just a really, like, laid back guy.
But he's a super serious teacher,
and I really like Sibusiso
because he kind of
took me under his wing when I got here,
and he really made an
effort to be my friend.
(kids talking)
I really think, when you're
teaching in Peace Corps,
especially in South Africa,
like you do have to steal
your heart a little bit.
Because otherwise, you're
just gonna bleed out.
You have to wear, like, emotional armor,
I think, otherwise it's
just too much heartbreak.
I give my students a practice test,
and a lot of them failed it,
and some of it's my fault.
I over-emphasized some
things that were not,
that I felt were really important,
but weren't emphasized
on the work schedule,
and that's totally on me and
it feels really bad right now.
That's what's tough.
(George and Sibusiso laughing)
Sibusiso: So even the ones
that you trusted to pass,
they didn't perform well?
George: No, I mean, the
ones I trusted to pass,
they passed or just almost
passed, so it's okay.
But, I mean, I don't know,
I just thought it would be better.
I thought it would be
better, so I don't know,
I thought it would be better.
Basically I'm asking him, like,
how can I get my math scores higher.
Because, I was, I graded a
small sample size of them,
but they weren't really that good.
And he says he gives
them a lot more homework
than I give them, but,
I gave my kids homework
in the beginning, they
just didn't do it. (laughs)
So I'm not sure if that's gonna work.
Yeah, I feel like I
failed those kids today.
Like I really do.
Sibusiso: Get past this one and-
George: I have to, I
learned my lesson now.
I have to follow your schedule probably
cause I think these kids
failed cause I messed up.
(scoffs)
Anyway, okay, thanks Si.
They always tell you this
in training and everything,
they say, you know, as
long as you get to know,
or as long as you know two or three kids,
get it, then, you made a
difference, you know, or
as long as that one kid can
use the past tense afterwards,
or you know, these kids
they finally understand
their multiplication tables and, you know,
even if you were doing it
for two years it's worth it.
I want to do better than that,
and it's not working out so far. (laughs)
I can't accept mediocrity, I can't do it,
I want all my kids to pass.
And I don't know how
I'm gonna do that yet.
(water streaming)
(people singing)
(pastor speaking in native language)
Sean: So I live in the
village of Ha-Lambani.
So the first day I arrived
was with my principal,
I knew that I hit Peace Corps jacktpot.
It was this cool sense
of feeling that like,
I had found a place, or
I had been put in a place
by Peace Corps that would work for me
and that I'd be able to do cool things.
Yeah, so there was pure
excitement when I came here.
And then we parked the car at the school,
and I met my host mom, and then afterwards
we walked up to the house,
and I was like, it was the
first feeling of disappointment,
cause I was like oh, man,
like, my house is really nice,
like, I'm not gonna be
like that stereotypical
Peace Corps volunteer.
But then I like met my family,
and we spent the night and
we had some dinner together,
and it was just, I knew it
was gonna be cool, yeah.
In the name of the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Spirit, Amen.
Bless us Lord in these fine
gifts which we are about
to receive through thy bounty
through Christ, our Lord, Amen.
All: Amen.
Sean: In the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, Amen.
(television chatter)
Venda is the language spoken
by less than a million people
spread throughout southern
Zimbabwe and northern Limpopo.
They still have their own way of eating,
their own way of kind of designing things,
living in a certain way.
They've never really had
to sell who they are,
they just have been who they are.
(guitar music)
(kids talking)
But in South Africa as a whole,
it's one of the only
countries where you can go
and poop in a pit latrine
and then be in a mall
and buy a pair of Nike's in the same day
within a respectful amount of time.
I think for some people it
becomes this crippling crutch
that, you know, whenever
I'm stressed I just need to
treat myself and I go into town.
So they kind of avoid
what's going to keep them
feeling connected in Peace Corps,
which is staying in your village,
being integrated into the community.
Oui.
Woman in pink: [Mefunzi].
Sean: [Mefunzi], oh right!
(speaking native language)
Oh the wife of Eric.
Is Eric here today?
Woman in pink: (speaking native
language) Over that side.
Sean: Okay, (speaking native language)
Yeah, this is South Africa,
like you can go to Menlyn
Mall, Brooklyn Mall,
be in these nice situations,
but like, your work is in the village,
that's what our agreement
is and that's what's gonna
kind of keep you happy.
Like, we know it's gonna keep you happy.
(insects buzzing)
Sean: Yeah.
(Eric speaking native language)
Eric: Maybe three hours
[unintelligible]. Three hours.
Sean: So it takes about three hours
to cut down a tree like this.
(speaking native language)
Sean: This is more expensive.
Eric: Yeah.
Sean: You're saying
this wood is used mostly
for like basic items like
spoons and cooking utensils.
And it's like a softer wood.
And this inner wood is used
more for like [mutoli],
the thing that we saw him building.
He was kind of carving the inside.
Oh, okay.
Eric: Go like so.
Sean: This morning we were
at Eric Lambani's house.
He is a local artist.
And he just has these really hard woods
that grow throughout Venda,
he cuts down the trees
and turns them into items
like canes for priests,
and he turns them into,
like, little sculptures
of kids that become ornaments for yards.
And we've been working on
trying to get some funding
for him to expand an
arts and crafts program
for local kids to kind of teach them
the ancient Venda ways
of doing woodcarving.
(speaking native language)
Sean: Oh, yeah.
(Eric laughing)
So they also make, he also
makes the little bones
for like the [samgoma]
when they put it in a,
and then you (blowing).
(speaking native language)
(laughing)
Sean: Yeah.
He was first discussing about like,
having coming from God and like God put
the message on his tongue,
and when he threw the bones
he learned different things.
And this bone talks about being careful
about African magic and that some people
have a lot of jealousy and
they will try to blind you
on your way but you have
to keep finding your way.
Don't let people be jealous,
and there's good people too that,
like him and his wife,
that aren't here to fight.
(speaking native language)
Sean: Gossip. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
There's so much, as
American's, that we don't see,
that we don't experience.
Peace Corps creates this
bizarre productive bubble
for Americans to go abroad,
like do things that help communities,
at the same time help America.
But putting Americans
in other people's shoes,
I think is our real goal.
Like putting Americans in shoes of people
in other countries because we have such a
big impact on the rest of the world.
(speaking native language)
(guitar music)
("La Bamba" by Ritchie Valens)
Fran: ♫ (lyrics) Bamba, bamba
♫ Bamba, bamba
♫ Para bailar La Bamba
♫ Se necessita una poca de gracia
♫ Una poca de gracia
♫ Para mi, para ti, ay arriba, ay arriba ♫
So my family is Filipino.
I don't know how many Asian
parents share with their kids
their experiences living in poverty.
My parents saw it as, we
emigrated out of poverty
to get you into a world
that's like developed
so you can live comfortably.
Like, why are you going back to poverty?
♫ Bamba, bamba ♫
Yay!
I wanted to see how the
rest of the world lived.
I knew I wasn't gonna
make a huge difference,
I knew I wasn't gonna change a village,
I knew I wasn't gonna build an orphanage,
but I knew that I needed to grow,
and I needed to see how the
rest of the world lived,
and I needed to be
grateful for what I had.
And I got exactly that.
That's what I came here for,
and that's exactly what I got.
Oh, one sec, one sec, one sec.
Lo-Himyani, it's a
village that's three hours
outside of the capital, Pretoria.
You know, in my opinion,
the people who stay here
have a real shot at getting a bursary
and moving out of this area
and moving into the city.
That's how I feel about Lo-Himyani,
and that's why I feel so strongly
about making a difference
here and building those relationships,
cause I really think that
these kids are briliant,
and their English is very good,
and they could climb the social ladder.
Oh, I made a mistake here, sorry guys.
(laughs)
(kids laughing)
[Douho]
Duoho: H?
Fran: Uh-huh.
Kids: Oh. L!
Fran: What does that spell?
Kids: School.
Fran: Yay! Okay.
Throughout the day I do my lesson,
and also prepare for
my girl's club meeting.
So I have girl's club twice a week,
I'll do my girl's club,
usually it consists of
games and then a topic,
and just talking about life.
(girl in center speaking native language)
(kids talking and laughing)
Fran: I just knew that the pregnancy rate
in these areas are really high,
and I also saw that like,
the super bright ones in
these classes were girls,
but I also knew they were really at risk,
because even though they're bright,
it doesn't mean that they won't be
sexually active when they are 12.
So I wanted to reach them
at a really young age,
and start talking to them really early on
about setting their goals and objectives,
and not being distracted by boys.
What about, do you guys
know Michelle Obama?
Kids: Yes!
Fran: Is she a leader?
(kids mumbling yes and no)
Fran: No?
Kids: Yes.
Fran: Okay, so do you think
that she's a good leader?
Kids: Yes.
Fran: Is she in a position where
people have to look up to her?
Kids: Yes.
Fran: Does that make her a leader?
Fran: Okay.
I'm just really worried that they're
gonna get pregnant at a really young age.
I don't think they're gonna get pregnant,
but I kind of think
they might get pregnant.
I mean, it's just so common here,
and it's so like in your face and,
it's not like they have
role models all the time
to tell them that that can
seriously ruin their chances.
Cause these girls are so smart,
if they had the right
foundation and the right people
to continuously push them,
they could be doctors or
whatever they want to be.
They could do that, but I don't,
if they get pregnant they're just not
gonna have that option.
What does it take to be a good leader?
Losecho: To be loyal,
responsible, and kind.
Fran: Okay, loyal, responsible, and kind.
Do you guys-
Losecho: And make a difference.
I am Losecho [Swayi].
My position in girl's
club is as a president.
I have to make sure that
the girl's club is in order,
there's no fighting,
people respect each other,
and no bullying to the little sisters.
Fran: Alright?
Kids: Yes.
Fran: So Losecho's gonna lead
the meeting today. (clapping)
Give her a round of applause.
(clapping)
Okay, so, I want you guys to give her
the same kind of respect
that you would give me, okay?
Kids: Yes.
Lesocho: They told us that
she was processing [in diego],
but in South Africa her
name is [Olevie Latuse].
She taught us to be loyal,
to never underestimate each other,
never undermine each other,
never take somebody for granted.
Cause you'll never know
what she's capable of,
as a girl or as a woman.
Fran: Okay, respect, yeah?
What's one of the rules of our club?
Kids: Respect.
Fran: Respect. Okay, so if you guys think
all of these qualities...
Lesocho: I just want to say that,
Pasma never underestimates girls.
Whenever boys tell them
that girls can't do this,
girls can't play rugby,
girls can't do this,
you just must sit them
down and tell them that,
it is possible.
Kids: [Let's go!]
(kids talking)
When I was younger, I
was really picked on.
Did you know that?
Lesocho: No.
Fran: Yeah, when I was really young,
when I was your age, I
was picked on by people,
and people would talk to me that way,
and they would make me
feel small and left out.
And so I was like you,
I would cry sometimes,
you know, by myself, because
it's very hurtful, you know?
The president at my primary school,
the president is Losecho,
one of my girls, [Ketomehse],
who's another one
of the girls that I am very close to,
they're just having problems.
I guess [Ketomehse] doesn't
want her to be friends
with [Tomoho], so she just
always make Losecho feel bad.
Whenever Losecho says something she like
gives her a look.
(Losecho crying)
There you go, there you go,
you'll be okay, Losecho.
I know it seems like a
very, very big deal now,
and it's very scary but I promise,
if you stay strong through this,
(knocking on door)
when you're older you won't
even think about it anymore.
It breaks my heart, it makes me so sad.
I, it makes me really
sad whenever they cry,
cause I remember how hard
that is to have people
pick on you or just not fit in,
or just be fighting with a friend.
Or just, you know,
continue to be yourself,
and don't let them make you feel small.
Because Losecho, you're not small.
Think about all the cool
stuff that you did today.
You led this whole meeting, you know?
By yourself. You're
president of the counsel,
you're smart, so don't
let the way somebody
treats you make you feel small, okay?
Losecho: Yes.
Just let her have her space,
[Ketomehse] will come around.
She'll grow, she's
still growing too, okay?
Losecho: Okay.
Fran: Alright?
Losecho: Mm-hmm.
Fran: You'll be okay?
Thanks for calling me this holiday.
(laughing)
Losecho: Nobody is going to replace Olebie
in my heart, nobody is.
She tells us what's
right and what's wrong.
To me, she's like my
own mother but (laughs)
not really my own, like
my second mother, yeah.
(guitar music)
I think it's harder to be a female
Peace Corps volunteer
here than it is to be a
male Peace Corps volunteer here.
I think there's a lot of
restrictions placed on us
because we're women
and a lot more dangers,
like if you ever go anywhere,
guys are always hustling
you, even in your village.
Everyone is, you know, cat-calling you,
but that happens everywhere in the world.
But I think here it's just
there's that extra element
of like, if I don't shut
this down immediately
it might lead to something more.
And then, he could rape
me, you know? (laughs)
And that's just because
of all the statistics
and people, PCV's who've
gotten raped and stuff.
That's not even like a subconscious thing.
I mean, every time you
hear about another one
of my friends like getting assaulted,
I'm just like, you know,
every time I walk around,
I'm like, you know, like really jumpy.
I wasn't like that when I came here.
(crowd talking)
It's crazy when you're here for two years,
and you can see like
another person's growth.
I'm sure they look at me and they're like
wow, she's changed a lot.
Like when I first came
here, I was like woo!
Cheers and doing dances with them,
and like playing games all the time.
And really idealistic,
and I just wonder like
if the kids have seen the change in terms
of like me becoming more realistic.
Put that under the table.
(crowd talking)
The balls here, put them
underneath the table.
I think there's so, I do think
there's a lot of potential here,
for like volunteers to
really make a difference.
The frustrating thing
about South Africa is
there's money here and
there's so much potential,
and there is a working
economy to a degree.
But I think volunteers need
to know what's going on.
Like, I think they really
need to know beforehand
what they're getting
themselves into I guess.
I would tell them to be
ready for challenges,
like mental challenges,
and I would tell them
to be ready for people to
just expect you to do things.
And to figure out how you
want to approach people
who have that attitude towards you.
And to know that just because
people aren't saying thank you
it doesn't mean you shouldn't still help.
That's what I would say.
Cameraman: [Unintelligible]
Fran: Very happy.
(crowd talking)
Fran: Go to start.
(singing in native language and clapping)
Ryan: I feel like it's a
very typical response to say,
you know, I joined Peace
Corps to change the world.
A main reason I wanted
to join Peace Corps was
I wanted to be in a different culture,
because I wanted to try
and see things differently.
That was one of the big motivations.
I wanted to learn another language,
I wanted to feel really uncomfortable.
(people talking in native language)
Ryan: Sing!
(women speaking in native language)
Ryan: They must sing!
(Women speaking in native language)
Ryan: They must!
(women speaking in native language)
(singing and clapping)
I think there's something so
beautiful and human and real
about the Zulu's singing and dancing
and the life behind that,
I would love to bring that back.
I've been able to go
to a few ceremonies and
participate in some really
wonderful activities
with the dancing.
(woman speaking in native language)
Ryan: You must teach them.
(singing and clapping)
(laughing and clapping)
Ryan: Thank you!
(women laughing and talking)
Weenen or Veenen is Africans
for the place of weeping.
Officially it became a town in 1841,
when the Africans came to this place
after many women and
children were brutally killed
by the Zulu's in an
agreement that went bad.
So, they were weeping,
coming to this place.
And started all different
kinds of farming in this area.
It's really great farming land.
But of course, there were
Zulu people living here.
It's been said that, you
know, apartheid really
was birthed in this area.
So, there's just a lot of history,
a lot of hatred in this place of weeping.
But, you could drive through
Weenen and not really,
you know, see a white person.
I also, I guess I saw
my role here as bridging
these two worlds.
Baba: Some people, it's news to them,
if you talk about HIV.
For some yes, they understand,
especially the elderly's.
You see, they grown up
people, they say oh fuck,
you are wasting your
time, I've got my wife,
and I make so many kids.
You come and tell me about HIV now?
No, that's no sense, go to the youngsters.
Ryan: So yesterday morning we
were in an area called Gunka.
So I met with the InDuna there,
to have a focus group meeting with him
and some of the men who
attended our event in November.
An event where the InDuna
trained men about HIV
and Aids transmission,
prevention, condom use,
HIV testing in medical
male circumcision mostly.
Baba: You see, in our
culture, we always pin
the responsibility of
teaching the boys to the Baba
When it comes to girls, we
feel that mother is going to,
you know, bring the girls up.
So it's like, I cannot, as a father,
bring my daughter to come
and sit here and say,
look my daughter, this
is how I want you to-
Ryan: Of course.
Baba: No, it's impossible.
Ryan: He seems like a natural born leader,
and I just think that it's
fantastic that he has been
chosen as an InDuna in the area.
He can communicate well with
different types of people,
and holds his authority
but not in a powerful way.
Where I've seen some other leaders
get obsessed with the power.
So I've been really
happy to work with him,
with this HIV education and information,
which can be a sensitive topic,
especially as a young female talking to
an elder male about these things.
You don't have to, if
you don't want to tell us
about testing or Mmc'ing, that's fine,
but have you had any
conversations from that meeting
maybe with your family or any other men,
what have you done since that meeting
with the information you learned?
(woman translating)
(man speaks in native language)
Translater: He says he
didn't say anything.
Ryan: I think it's a really complicated
and complex history.
You have to understand
the history to understand
how and why things are the way they are.
For 50 years you had a government that had
an education system that
was oppressing people.
In this area in particular,
the Zulu's were evicted from their lands.
They had their land, their
homes, and their livestock
taken away from them.
So you look at all these
things and you can understand,
you begin to understand where
the people are coming from.
Which I think, you need
to have understanding
coming into these
communities and working here.
You have to.
So maybe you can talk
to one of the counselors
and see if they'd be willing to do that.
Baba: Yeah, yeah.
Ryan: Wonderful. Also, what
I wanted to say is that
I'm leaving South Africa in a few weeks.
Baba: Really?
Ryan: I'm finished, yeah.
Baba: Yeah?
Ryan: I've been here for three years now.
Baba: Oh.
Ryan: but I'll miss,
I'll miss these things.
Baba: It's been so nice working with you.
Ryan: Mmm.
Baba: Really.
(engine chugging)
Les: I'm Les.
Hazel: And I'm Hazel.
Les: And we're the Stanleys.
(laughing)
Ryan: I met Les and Hazel
Stanley after being here
about four or five months.
So they were doing some
outreach work in the community,
doing English education
on a Friday afternoon.
At their home, they
have a training center.
And it was so amazing,
cause they've worked in
KwaZulu-Natal their whole lives,
they're South African,
they've worked in eduction
in [imeril] areas their whole lives,
so they shared a lot of
the same frustrations
that I shared.
Hazel: We went to friends for supper and
they had told us that they had discovered
this young, black girl living in Stenden.
And, this I remember very clearly,
meeting her and immediately thinking wow,
she must have something very special.
Especially in an area that just has this
incredible history of hatred.
And here's this young girl in Stenden.
We were amazed.
You know, for the people,
cause I believe that
also brings healing amongst
even the white people here,
when they see what she's done.
People who wouldn't even drive,
white people wouldn't drive into Stenden,
because, you know, you
don't drive in there,
it's too dangerous.
And there's this young girl living there,
and suddenly people are going in there.
Because they're seeing, you
know, it's actually okay.
these people are fine.
(crowd talking)
(woman speaking native language)
Ryan: Okay, so let's pretend the water
is the male sex fluid, okay?
And the male's HIV positive.
If he's wearing a condom,
the fluid goes into a little
pocket, into the condom.
(woman speaking native language)
Les: Whatever the vehicle
that is being used,
whether it's HIV, whether
it's computer courses
that they offer,
the most important thing that she's given
many of the young folk here, is a hope.
And she's, she's enabled
them, and she's actually
empowered them to be catalysts for change.
Ryan: So, exactly, you pinch
this so that no air can enter.
(woman translating)
Ryan: So follow me, okay?
Okay?
(kids talking and laughing)
It's inside out, see?
Okay, no very good, very good.
Now, can he or someone else explain
how does this protect you from HIV?
[Kunjen], how?
Les: I would just like to
say thank you to Peace Corps
for what is being done in the country,
and yeah, just a very
special thank you for Ryan.
Hazel: Yeah. (laughs)
Yeah, I just, Ryan is
just so special to us,
and, yeah, she's been
like a daughter to us.
And we're gonna miss her incredibly.
(kids talking)
Ryan: For so long we're here,
and we feel like we're
not making any progress.
We feel like we're not having any impact
or influence over the
people we're working with.
It's not often you get people that say,
hey thanks for doing this,
or you helped me with this.
And that's not why you do it,
but every once in a while
you need that encouragement.
So, even just the past few
weeks when I've started
to tell people I'm leaving,
and just to hear their reactions,
or to see them feel saddened by it.
It's comforting in some way,
as strange as that might sound,
because it kind of feels like oh,
well you did know that I was here,
you did recognize that
I was at least trying.
I might not have done
everything that you wanted,
but at least I really cared
and I tried really hard.
So to finally feel like noticed I guess.
It means a lot,
because it's really hard to keep going
when you feel like no one
even cares that you're here.
And for awhile it feels like that.
(kids clapping and talking)
(kids singing and clapping)
And I think you come in as a volunteer
wanting to see these huge changes,
but also knowing that sometimes
it's in the small things.
Those are where the miracles are.
It's not this big idea that
we have of changing the world,
it's starts with each and every one of us,
and it's very small but
those are the big things.
So I think we have to also
change the way we view success.
(clapping and talking)
Ryan: (speaking native
language) Girls, get it.
(singing and clapping)
(guitar playing)
(people talking)
(Veronica laughs)
Veronica: There were a lot of
other volunteers in my cohort
that started like months
and months ago packing up.
And I started like not
that long ago. (laughs)
Like doing the bulk of it this week.
So that's been just a hectic thing
of sorting through things.
Giving away like clothes
and things I didn't want.
(laughs)
Young girl: Veronica?
Veronica: Yeah.
(boy in t-shirt speaks in native language)
Veronica: Yeah. (speaks
in native language)
(boy in t-shirt speaks in native language)
(girl in green speaks in native language)
Veronica: No, in America.
I think they realize I'm going,
but they don't know I'm
not coming back. (laughs)
No, cause even like adults in my family,
or like neighbors, have
come up to me this week
and just like oh, I didn't even realize
that you would like ever leave type thing.
And I was just like yeah. (laughs)
(laughs) Remember me
from the farewell party.
Woman in stripes: Okay,
thank you. It's nice.
(Veronica laughs)
Yeah, I remember you Veronica.
Veronica: (laughs) Yeah.
Woman in stripes: But today, you go?
Veronica: Yeah, yeah.
And a lot of people, I know
this has been used to describe
like other South Africans,
but I know a lot of people,
especially at my organization,
they're very stoic and not,
they won't like break down and cry,
like I didn't expect anyone to break down
and cry or anything. (laughs)
(Veronica laughs)
Woman in stripes: Don't go.
Stay here.
Veronica: (laughs) No, I have to go.
I have to see my family and, yeah.
Woman in stripes: Giyan is boring you.
Veronica: No, no, I like Giyan.
Woman in stripes: You like
Giyan. You like to stay with us.
Veronica: I'll try to.
I definitely felt not
as emotional or like,
yeah, I guess emotional
as other volunteers.
So like, I'll talk to other people that,
other volunteers in my group,
and they're like very
sad and crying every day.
And it's just like I cried
a little bit yesterday,
but I don't know if it has hit me yet.
And so like, yeah there are
times when I'm lying in bed,
like, should I, I feel like a bad person
because I'm not an emotional wreck.
Veronica: Whoa!
(girl in pink laughs)
Girl in pink: Goodbye.
Veronica: Goodbye, I'm gonna miss you.
Veronica: Oh!
Having the full two years of just like
all the interactions, all the experiences,
it's how it's changed me.
And like I'm glad that
I just did the two years
because of that and like
learned from my organization
for the whole two years,
and continued to work with them for this
entire two years because I felt like
having that whole time
period was important to me.
(rooster cawing)
I don't know, I guess I
would describe coming back
as kind of overwhelming and
underwhelming at the same time.
I mean, cause there are like adjustments
that you need to make and,
just like getting used to
like how you lived before.
And just like reconnecting
with friends and family.
It's a big thing, but also
you realize that just like
people have been here living their lives
for those two years as well.
So it's just like interesting
and weird to just like
come back and see that
your friends have changed,
and like oh yeah, they were
living for two years too.
(laughs)
I'm definitely glad to be back.
I don't know if I'm
gonna miss South Africa.
I definitely miss like the
people that I worked with
and that I lived around in my village.
And every now and then there are things
that I miss of just like,
actually like taxis for some reason,
I kind of miss them. (laughs)
Cameraman: How is it going?
Veronica: It's alright,
stressful as well. (laughs)
Just to not have your own space and, yeah.
It's hard to be 20 living
with your parents. (laughs)
In your 20's living with your parents.
But, I mean, it's good to like be here
and just like also spend time with them
since I've been gone, too.
Veronica's mom: Veronica?
Get you some more. Veronica?
Veronica: Yes?
Veronica's mom: I'll get you some.
Veronica: Okay. (laughs)
(people talking)
(class reciting)
Class: How are you.
Sean: Sounds good.
As I continue to go through Peace Corps,
I quickly started to realize that this is
like purely dependent on the individual.
And it's like a very
individual experience.
You can let other volunteers
and other elements
impact you, but at the end of the day,
it's really a matter of you.
And so, yeah, my opinion
changed from it being like this
Americans abroad to like Sean abroad,
like Sean, the American abroad.
So we're gonna read a story,
and I want you guys to look for
the uncountable nouns, okay?
Winnie the Pooh went around to
his friend, Christopher Robin.
I wonder if you got a balloon, he said.
What do you want a balloon for?
Do we see any uncountable nouns?
Any countable or uncountable nouns?
There's this perception about
Americans being aggressive,
and it's just in general not understanding
the rest of the world.
And I think that's reflected in our TV,
it's reflected in our politics,
it's reflected in a lot of
elements of our culture.
But I think if we have this
massive amount of people
that got exposed to Peace Corps,
and they did in a good, strong manner,
I think it would cause a general change
in a lot of those layers of our culture.
The change that happens
within the individuals
is immeasurable for like, I don't know,
just the benefit of, the
social benefit in the states.
(water running)
Kevin: I would maintain that even a bad
Peace Corps volunteer is
still good for America.
And I mean that by, even if
you have a volunteer that,
let's say you had one that wasn't good,
that liked to party or he
didn't go to school as much.
He's still a human being, he's seen as,
they may look at him as,
you know, he wasn't helpful
or this or that, but he's
not gonna be viewed as evil.
To hate America, you kind of
have to demonize people, right?
That's how bad things happen.
So, it's be hard to demonize even the
worst Peace Corps volunteer.
You might say oh, they're silly,
or they didn't do what
they were supposed to do.
But we're not evil.
(kids talking and screaming)
Fran: I'm really hoping
that one of my girls,
like one day will be like
President of South Africa,
and would be like, I had
a PCV who was a teacher,
you know, and she changed
my mind about my capacity.
Alright, listen up, okay!
Personally, I feel very fulfilled.
I feel like I've grown,
and these people have affected me hugely.
And, in that I'm very
grateful for this opportunity.
You have a lot today, eh?
(woman in hat speaking native language)
We have come into a
community where people,
people didn't think that
America cared about them at all.
And we have come and dedicated
two years of our lives
to show that not only do we care
about what's happening
with the rest of the world
and what's happening with
them on a personal level,
but that we're just like them.
But she makes it perfectly, eh?
I won't make it as good as her.
Man in jacket: No, just
go to her and ask her.
Fran: The recipe?
Man in jacket: Yeah. Then
she'll write down for you.
Fran: Mmm, mmm.
Man in jacket: Then you'll
prepare it for yourself.
Fran: Mmm.
Man in jacket: You see?
Then you'll start a business that side.
(laughing)
Fran: I don't think
America's ready for this.
That's why this is important.
And it is, it is important, you know?
And it is important even in the sense of
the government wants us, wants
Peace Corps to be that branch
that's like look, we
are helping the world,
because America needs that image. (laughs)
We can't just be seen as
war mongers all the time,
that's not gonna help us.
(people talking)
Ryan: As I said, it's hard
letting go of projects.
It's been really hard
to come to terms with
that I'm leaving here after three years.
And that's something I'm
personally dealing with.
But to know that there is
another volunteer coming,
that's hopefully going to
pick up where I left off.
(speaking native language)
Should we call?
Woman with umbrella: Who is it?
Ryan: [Makese, Mama Makese].
Woman with umberella: Makese.
Ryan: I guess.
Woman with umbrella: Hello?
Ryan: This is an amazing place.
It's been challenging beyond belief,
but it's a beautiful place,
the people are so welcoming.
So I think the volunteer
will do wonderful things.
And I can't wait to see what happens.
I think maybe Monday,
maybe by three or four,
if you want to come with me here,
I have some books for the volunteer,
and I just want to make sure
everything's set up nicely
so when she comes Tuesday it's okay.
Learning about the relationships
has been a big part of this experience,
and how people are
really all that we have.
I mean, we get so caught up in so many
other worldly things that we forget that.
(speaking native language)
I want to give books.
Mama Makese: Yeah.
Ryan: To make it-
Mama Makese: Oh finish and make it nice.
Ryan: Yeah, yeah.
I think we make things more complicated
then they are, in America.
And there's an obsession of
our time being so valuable,
but I question what are
we doing with our time.
If you're not using your extra time
to really spend it with
the people you care about,
or to add real depth
and value to your life,
is it a good thing?
George: Oh, gosh, I was just
looking this up yesterday,
I'm not gonna lie, I'm kind of at,
they call it peaks and valleys,
that's what they call it.
And the Peace Corps
staff, the medical staff,
actually gives you like this graph.
There's this graph and it's all about
your ups and your downs
during your service,
and it's really accurate. (laughs)
And right now I'm kind of
in a down turn, currently.
I don't really know what it is,
I don't know why Peace
Corps does it to you.
I think because maybe you
don't have any control
sometimes when you're in Peace Corps,
and that can be really
difficult for some people.
And you know, mentally, gosh,
I teach a lot of classes,
and so I'm in front of a class, you know,
four out of six periods of the day,
and sometimes after school,
and sometimes on the weekends,
so it gets kind of tiring.
And emotionally it's like I said,
the rug gets pulled out from
under you a lot more here,
or a lot more during your
service then you'd expect.
But you just gotta deal with it,
gotta roll with it. (laughs)
That's the only way you're gonna make it,
getting a laugh like I am now. (laughs)
Aye, aye, aye.
On sour cream walls, donations.
Shakespeare's head, cloudless at dawn.
It sounds awful, but you
can't be too empathetic.
Like, there really are some students,
and I'm sure it's the
same way in the states,
they're just not gonna listen to you.
And, it's really sad, you try your best,
and I have tried my best,
but if they don't come to school
I'm not sure what I can do.
This map becomes their window
and these windows that shut
upon their lives like catacombs.
Break open, break open
until they break the town.
And show the children green fields,
and make their world
run azure on gold sands,
and let their tongues
run naked into books.
The white and green leaves open.
History is their's who's
language is the sun.
Oh gosh, I love that, I love
that grade 12 poetry class.
Yeah so, once a week,
usually on Thursdays,
I'll meet with some of
the grade 12 students
who are gonna be taking their
exam at the end of the year.
I really enjoy it, and I think
it keeps me a little sane, maybe?
What do you think that means,
to be like paper?
Student: To be thin.
George: Yeah, exactly!
Exactly, the paper is thin.
So this boy is like paper,
you can just rip it.
He's so, he's so thin.
(students talking)
I don't know, maybe I'm a science person.
Like, you know, like I
want to see statistics.
That's also what PC wants to see, too,
they want to see statistics.
You know, you reach x amount of youth,
the passing level went from here to here,
that's not really what
I think is important.
Like I think it's
important to make friends
and to have people remember you.
What you're doing is you're
not so much building something,
you're building relationships with people.
And that's really what Peace
Corps South Africa is about.
Building relationships with people,
and hopefully gradually making a change.
None of these, none of them are good.
But then, now tell me about
[deliverer] number four.
Girl in pink: He's just muttering things.
Not even concentrating
on what is happening.
Like, he's not even there.
George: Yeah, that's right.
It says that his eyes live in a dream,
a squirrels dream in a tree root.
So, maybe he's sitting there,
but he's looking out the window.
But the other thing is that
it says he's sweet and young.
Which means that all these
other children [there],
they are broken.
But this one, he's
still, he's still strong,
but he's still looking outside.
The rest of these children are broken.
He's, maybe you can help him.
So that's why I said is there any mention
of hope on question one.
And I think this boy, maybe he has hope.
(kids talking)
(clapping and singing)